---
dateCreated: "2022-04-01T14:00:00Z"  # ISO 8601 format
---

<blockquote>
    <p> [...] that I could not contain my happiness as I made ready to meet her. This sense of joy rested on something fragile and insecure. If she was late, my thoughts became cloudy with worry that she was never coming to see me again, or that she was bored by the predictability of how we spent our time together. She was ashamed of me, of the work I did, of my lack of ambition, of my strangeness, my ordinariness, my blackness, my poverty. Then when she came, and smiled to see me, and held me so tightly and so long that I could not mistake the intensity of her pleasure in me, when she came and held me like that, the darkness evaporated and I cried happiness. She knew this about me, how tensely and expectantly I waited for her, but she did not know the vulnerability that lay just below it. </p>
    <figcaption>Gravel Heart, Abdulrazak Gurnah. Read April 2020, and again on a flight in summer 2023.</figcaption>
</blockquote>

I'm not quite the writer to write on the subject of love yet and contribute anything new to the conversation. That's why this excerpt is titled 'insecure attachment' instead of 'insecure love'. With this thinly veiled excuse out of the way, my quick take on why insecure love goes so deep.  One explanation is that of neediness. I do not think there is any shame in admitting that love is something we seek out to complete our own life. It is a selfish endeavor. But I think it is a beautiful privilege that by loving, and being loved, we get to add so much to somebody's life in addition to the personal benefit. Some people claim that "you have to love yourself to be loved".  I am not sure whether it is true. I am convinced however, that you do not have to love yourself to love someone else. It is this type of love, which has the strongest sensation of "completing" your own incomplete life. The quote above had me teary-eyed, for the character's craving of completeness through her love was so infectious and intensely believable. 

But, this is going down the determined road of the personal explainability of love, of which I'm not necessarily convinced. It is the conviction that love is a consequence of personal psychological reasons, as opposed to the effect of an external factor, i.e. the love interest. Falling in love swung as a wrecking ball through my conception of myself, so much  so that it seems more sensible to be the cause for insecurities than its consequence. If the embrace that makes you weep with happiness is the high, the darkness it evaporates is its withdrawal. Maybe loving with a certain intensity inevitably brings along insecurities. 